---
layout: post
title: "6.1 IN Operator Design"
description: "Design doc for the IN operator"
category: "6. Design"
---

# IN Operator

## OData Specification

The IN operator is a [new feature](http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/new-in-odata/v4.01/cn01/new-in-odata-v4.01-cn01.html#_Toc485385090 "new feature") in OData 4.01 that enables a shorthand way of writing multiple EQ expressions joined by OR. For example,

`GET /service/Products?$filter=Name eq ‘Milk’ or Name eq ‘Cheese’ or Name eq ‘Donut’`

can become

`GET /service/Products?$filter=Name in (‘Milk’, ‘Cheese’, ‘Donut’)`

Of the binary expression invoking IN, the left operand must be a single value and the right operand must be a comma-separated list of primitive values or a single expression that resolves to a collection; the expression returns true if the left operand is a member of the right operand.

## Syntax

### [Augmented Backus-Naur Form (ABNF)](http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/csprd04/abnf/ "Augmented Backus-Naur Form (ABNF)")

Per the ABNF, the IN operator is part of the common expression syntax

```
commonExpr = ( primitiveLiteral
             / arrayOrObject
             / rootExpr
             / firstMemberExpr
             / functionExpr
             / negateExpr
             / methodCallExpr
             / parenExpr
             / listExpr
             / castExpr
             / isofExpr
             / notExpr
             )
             [ addExpr
             / subExpr
             / mulExpr
             / divExpr
             / divbyExpr
             / modExpr
             ]
             [ eqExpr
             / neExpr
             / ltExpr
             / leExpr
             / gtExpr
             / geExpr
             / hasExpr
             / inExpr
```

Test cases explicitly outlined by the ABNF spec include the following (see Scenarios for details on some of these types of queries):

```xml
<TestCase Name="5.1.1.1.12 Logical Operator Examples" Rule="boolCommonExpr">
  <Input>Name in ('Milk', 'Cheese')</Input>
</TestCase>
<TestCase Name="5.1.1.1.12 Logical Operator Examples" Rule="boolCommonExpr">
  <Input>Name in ["Milk", "Cheese"]</Input>
</TestCase>
```

### Static Collection Versus Collection Expression

A static collection is a defined as a comma-delimited list of objects of the same type and is enclosed by parentheses or brackets. A collection expression is represented by a collection in the EDM model; the client can traverse navigation properties from the original entity collection to access other collections.

### Left and Right Operands

As the IN operator is a shorthand way of writing multiple EQ operators, the [rules of EQ](http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part2-url-conventions/odata-v4.01-cs01-part2-url-conventions.html#sec_Equals "rules of EQ") apply regarding what the left and right operand types can be. That is, the comparison must be between the same type (e.g. “String in Collection.String” and not “String in Collection.Int”).

## Scenarios

### Filtering Members of a Collection

The following scenarios demonstrate how the IN operator can be used in a filter expression.

#### Filtering members with IN operator using static collection in parentheses

`GET /service/Products?$filter=Name in (‘Milk’, ‘Cheese’)`

Result: Members of Products whose Name is Milk or Cheese.

#### Filtering members with IN operator using static collection in brackets

`GET /service/Products?$filter=Name in [‘Milk’, ‘Cheese’]`

Result: Members of Products whose Name is Milk or Cheese.

#### Filtering members with IN operator using collection as expression

`GET /service/MovieSeries?$filter=Name in MovieTitles`

Result: Members of MovieSeries whose Name is equal to any member of the string collection MovieTitles.

Note: In other words, this query is attempting to retrieve movies series whose name (e.g. “The Lion King”) is also the name of one of movies in the series (e.g. first movie of “The Lion King” series is also called “The Lion King”).

#### Filtering members with IN operator using constant as single value

`GET /service/Stores?$filter=’Milk’ in RecalledProducts`

Result: Members of Stores whose RecalledProducts string collection contains the member ‘Milk’.

Note: Constant left operand with static collection right operand is another combination that works but does not make much sense from a use case standpoint. 

#### Filtering members with IN operator using navigation properties

`GET /service/Shipments?$filter=ShipToAddress/CountryCode in Shipper/Regions`

Result: Members of Shipments whose CountryCode string property in the ShipToAddress navigation property is equal to any member of the Regions string collection in the Shipper navigation property.

#### Filtering members with nested IN operator using static collection in parentheses

`GET /service/Products?$filter=(Name in (‘Milk’, ‘Cheese’)) eq false`

Result: Members of Products whose Name is not Milk or Cheese.

#### Filtering members with IN operator using bound function

`GET /service/Products?$filter=Name in MostPopularItemNames`

Result: Members of Products whose Name is in the collection returned by bound function MostPopularItemNames.

#### Filtering members with IN operator using parameter alias

`GET /service/Products?$filter=Name in @a1&@a1=(‘Milk’, ‘Cheese’)`

Result: Members of Products whose Name is Milk or Cheese.

### Other Scenarios

Aside from the filter expression, the IN operator can also generally be used in expressions where logical operators are applicable (e.g. eq, ne, gt, ge, etc.). Other query options where the expression applies should also be considered; these include $orderBy and $compute.

## Design Strategy

### Uri Query Expression Parser

The logic to parse expressions for query options are written in the UriQueryExpressionParser class (`src\Microsoft.OData.Core\UriParser\Parsers\UriQueryExpressionParser.cs`). The algorithm tokenizes the expression by whitespaces and builds QueryTokens from the operands. If more than one operand exists, then the algorithm recursively builds the right operand as a tree.

There exists a code flow for generating binary operator tokens (used for eq, ne, gt, ge, has, etc.), which would make sense for IN to follow. However, the binary operator tokens are eventually converted to binary operator nodes, where the left and right nodes must be single value nodes; the binary operator node does not suit the IN operator, which has a left single-valued operand and right collection-valued operand. Therefore, we will create separate QueryToken, MetadataBinder, and SingleValueNode classes to accommodate IN.

Additionally, we will need to ensure that the expression parser can read static collections (i.e. parentheses- or bracket-enclosed members).

#### QueryToken Class

We will need to derive a separate class for IN scenarios. The code path looks similar to the BinaryOperatorToken construction but the algorithm will result in an InOperationToken, which holds different information from the BinaryOperatorToken. See `src\Microsoft.OData.Core\UriParser\Parsers\UriQueryExpressionParser.cs : ParseComparison()` for code path.

```csharp
/// <summary>
/// Base class for all lexical tokens of OData query.
/// </summary>
public abstract class QueryToken 
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Empty list of arguments.
    /// </summary>
    [SuppressMessage("Microsoft.Security", "CA2105:ArrayFieldsShouldNotBeReadOnly", Justification = "Modeled after Type.EmptyTypes")]
    public static readonly QueryToken[] EmptyTokens = new QueryToken[0];

    /// <summary>
    /// The kind of the query token.
    /// </summary>
    public abstract QueryTokenKind Kind { get; }

    /// <summary>
    /// Accept a <see cref="ISyntacticTreeVisitor{T}"/> to walk a tree of <see cref="QueryToken"/>s.
    /// </summary>
    /// <typeparam name="T">Type that the visitor will return after visiting this token.</typeparam>
    /// <param name="visitor">An implementation of the visitor interface.</param>
    /// <returns>An object whose type is determined by the type parameter of the visitor.</returns>
    public abstract T Accept<T>(ISyntacticTreeVisitor<T> visitor);
}
```

#### MetadataBinder Class

We will need to create a binder to consume an InOperationToken and create an InOperationNode. See `src\Microsoft.OData.Core\UriParser\Binders\MetadataBinder.cs` for use cases on the MetadataBinder. Note that the new binder does not derive from the MetadataBinder class; see `src\Microsoft.OData.Core\UriParser\Binders\BinaryOperatorBinder.cs` as sample implementation.

#### SingleValueNode Class

The InOperationNode will derive from the SingleValueNode class and will have similarities with the BinaryOperatorNode. The InOperationNode will have a SingleValueNode and CollectionNode.

```csharp
/// <summary>
/// Base class for all semantic metadata bound nodes which represent a single composable value.
/// </summary>
public abstract class SingleValueNode : QueryNode
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Gets the type of the single value this node represents.
    /// </summary>
    public abstract IEdmTypeReference TypeReference
    {
        get;
    }

    /// <summary>
    /// Gets the kind of this node.
    /// </summary>
    public override QueryNodeKind Kind
    {
        get { return (QueryNodeKind)this.InternalKind; }
    }
}
```

#### Static Collections with Parentheses/Brackets

The expression parser must also recognize static collections enclosed by parentheses or brackets. In these instances, the parser must create a collection with such objects.